README.md, before:

Introduction
============
This project provides a set of APIs to encode and decode **sparse** **n**etwork **c**odes. Network coding [1][2] is known to be able to improve network throughput and combat packet loss by algebrically combining packets at intermediate nodes. This library provides several computationally efficient network codes to overcome the high complexity issue of the random linear network coding (RLNC). The basic idea is to encode against subsets of source packets. In early development of this library, the subsets are referred to as generations [3][4][5][6]. In current version, the subsets are referred to as **subgenerations** because in network coding literature the term "generation" is sometimes used to refer to the whole set of source packets to be coded by RLNC. Using subgenerations is to 1) avoid naming conflict and 2) to emphasize the subset concept. The RLNC is a special case that the number of subgenerations is one.

The library at present supports two major catagories of sparse network codes (SNC): random and band codes. Random SNC encodes from subgenerations that are randomly overlapped whereas the band code encodes from subgenerations that are overlapped consecutively (in terms of packet indices). The _band_ name comes from that its decoding matrix is a band matrix. The library also provides a variant of the band codes called window-wrapped codes. The difference is that the code allows wrap-around in some encoding vectors and therefore the decoding matrix is not ideally banded.

Five decoders with different performance tradeoff considerations are implemented in the library. The (sub)generation-by-(sub)generation (GG) decoder has a linear-time complexity but exhibits higher decoding-induced overhead. On the other hand, the overlap-aware (OA) decoder [6] has optimized code overhead but exhibits higher complexity. These two decoders essentially can be used for all kinds of subgeneration-based code (i.e., not limited to the two codes currently provided in the library). The band (BD) and compact band (CBD) decoders can only be applied to the band code. The decoders have optimized code overheads as well and their complexities are between GG and OA decoders. CBD decoder uses compact matrix representation and therefore has lower memory usage. BD decoder, on the other hand, employes pivoting techniques and therefore its decoding complexity is lower. BD decoder uses full-size matrix representation for random access, as is heavily needed during pivoting. So BD decoder has higher memory usage. Note that since the RLNC can be viewed as a special band code with band-length being the total number of source packets, BD and CBD decoder can be used to decode RLNC as well, which we referred to as the *naive* mode. A PP(perpetual) decoder is also provided, which can only be used to decode the window-wrapped codes. It handles wrap-around encoding vectors more carefully than the CBD decoder, which would treat encoding vectors of the window-wrapped codes naively as dense vectors. PP decoder is merely included for comparisons in research.

Systematic coding is also supported, which generates coded packets from each subgeneration only after each source packet therein is sent once. The decoding cost can be significantly reduced when the code is used in networks with low packet loss rate. The price to pay is higher overhead if the number of subgenerations is greater than 1. It is recommended to use systematic coding for RLNC in many scenarios (e.g., [7]).

For more details about subgeneration-based codes and the decoder design, please refer to [3].

Usage
============
The library is available as a shared library which is compiled by

```shell
$ make libsparsenc.so
```

Accessing API is via `include/sparsenc.h`. 

To test codes and decoders, run

```shell
$ make sncDecoders
```

and test using

```shell
usage: ./sncDecoder code_t dec_t datasize pcrate size_b size_g size_p bpc bnc sys
                       code_t   - RAND, BAND, WINDWRAP
                       dec_t    - GG, OA, BD, CBD, PP
                       datasize - Number of bytes
                       pcrate   - Precode rate (percentage of check packets)
                       size_b   - Subgeneration distance
                       size_g   - Subgeneration size
                       size_p   - Packet size in bytes
                       bpc      - Use binary precode (0 or 1)
                       bnc      - Use binary network code (0 or 1)
                       sys      - Systematic code (0 or 1)
```

Please see `makefile` for other available examples.

Limitation
============
The library only supports coding against a given block of source packets, i.e., a *generation* of packets as termed in the network coding literature. Sliding-window mode is not supported.

Reference
============
[1] Ahlswede, Rudolf; N. Cai, Shuo-Yen Robert Li, and Raymond Wai-Ho Yeung. "Network Information Flow". IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-46 46 (4): 1204–1216, 2000.

[2] T. Ho, M. Medard, R. Koetter, and D. R. Karger, "A Random Linear Network Coding Approach to Multicast", in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol 52, No. 10, pp. 4413–4430, 2006.

[3] Ye Li, "Efficient Network Coding for Different Network Topologies", Queen's University PhD Thesis, Oct., 2014. Available: https://qspace.library.queensu.ca/bitstream/1974/12602/1/Li_Ye_201410_PhD.pdf

[4] Ye Li, W.-Y. Chan, and S. D. Blostein, "Network Coding with Unequal Size Overlapping Generations", in Proceedings of International Symposium on Network Coding (NetCod), pp. 161-166, Cambridge, MA, June, 2012.

[5] Ye Li, S. D. Blostein, and W.-Y. Chan, "Large File Distribution Using Efficient Generation-based Network Coding", in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshop on Cloud Computing Systems, Networks, and Applications, Atlanta, GA, 2013.

[6] Ye Li, W.-Y. Chan, and S. D. Blostein, "On Efficient Decoding and Design of Sparse Random Linear Network Coding", available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.05573

[7] Ye Li, W.-Y. Chan, and S. D. Blostein, "Systematic Network Coding for Two-Hop Lossy Transmissions", EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, pp.1-14, 2015:93 DOI: 10.1186/s13634-015-0273-3

Commit message:

Rewrite GG decoder and add systematic scheduling
The GG decoder is rewritten to make use of the row_vector data
structure. This helps to save memory usage and would make the decoder
simpler.

Systematic scheduling is added to sncRecoder. For systematic codes, the
scheduling would forward each received systematic packet (i.e., if not
erased in the upstream hop). In line networks, this not only reduces
decoding cost, but also improves end-to-end rate because each systematic
packet is innovative for downstream nodes of the line network with
probability one.

README.md, after:

Introduction
============
This project provides a set of APIs to encode and decode **sparse** **n**etwork **c**odes. Network coding [1][2] is known to be able to improve network throughput and combat packet loss by algebrically combining packets at intermediate nodes. This library provides several computationally efficient network codes to overcome the high complexity issue of the random linear network coding (RLNC). The basic idea is to encode against subsets of source packets. In early development of this library, the subsets are referred to as generations [3][4][5][6]. In current version, the subsets are referred to as **subgenerations** because in network coding literature the term "generation" is sometimes used to refer to the whole set of source packets to be coded by RLNC. Using subgenerations is to 1) avoid naming conflict and 2) to emphasize the subset concept. The RLNC is a special case that the number of subgenerations is one.

The library at present supports two major catagories of sparse network codes (SNC): random and band codes. Random SNC encodes from subgenerations that are randomly overlapped whereas the band code encodes from subgenerations that are overlapped consecutively (in terms of packet indices). The _band_ name comes from that its decoding matrix is a band matrix. The library also provides a variant of the band codes called window-wrapped codes. The difference is that the code allows wrap-around in some encoding vectors and therefore the decoding matrix is not ideally banded.

Five decoders with different performance tradeoff considerations are implemented in the library. The (sub)generation-by-(sub)generation (GG) decoder has a linear-time complexity but exhibits higher decoding-induced overhead. On the other hand, the overlap-aware (OA) decoder [6] has optimized code overhead but exhibits higher complexity. These two decoders essentially can be used for all kinds of subgeneration-based code (i.e., not limited to the two codes currently provided in the library). The band (BD) and compact band (CBD) decoders can only be applied to the band code. The decoders have optimized code overheads as well and their complexities are between GG and OA decoders. CBD decoder uses compact matrix representation and therefore has lower memory usage. BD decoder, on the other hand, employes pivoting techniques and therefore its decoding complexity is lower. BD decoder uses full-size matrix representation for random access, as is heavily needed during pivoting. So BD decoder has higher memory usage. Note that since the RLNC can be viewed as a special band code with band-length being the total number of source packets, BD and CBD decoder can be used to decode RLNC as well, which we referred to as the *naive* mode. A PP(perpetual) decoder is also provided, which can only be used to decode the window-wrapped codes. It handles wrap-around encoding vectors more carefully than the CBD decoder, which would treat encoding vectors of the window-wrapped codes naively as dense vectors. PP decoder is merely included for comparisons in research.

Systematic coding is also supported, which generates coded packets from each subgeneration only after each source packet therein is sent once. The decoding cost can be significantly reduced when the code is used in networks with low packet loss rate. The price to pay is higher overhead if the number of subgenerations is greater than 1. It is recommended to use systematic coding for RLNC in many scenarios (e.g., [7]).

For more details about subgeneration-based codes and the decoder design, please refer to [3].

Usage
============
The library is available as a shared library which is compiled by

```shell
$ make libsparsenc.so
```

Accessing API is via `include/sparsenc.h`. 

To test codes and decoders, run

```shell
$ make sncDecoders
```

and test using

```shell
usage: ./sncDecoders code_t dec_t datasize pcrate size_b size_g size_p bpc bnc sys
                       code_t   - RAND, BAND, WINDWRAP
                       dec_t    - GG, OA, BD, CBD, PP
                       datasize - Number of bytes
                       pcrate   - Precode rate (percentage of check packets)
                       size_b   - Subgeneration distance
                       size_g   - Subgeneration size
                       size_p   - Packet size in bytes
                       bpc      - Use binary precode (0 or 1)
                       bnc      - Use binary network code (0 or 1)
                       sys      - Systematic code (0 or 1)
```

To test the code over example networks, run

```
$ make sncRecoders-n-Hop
```

for using network codes over an n-hop line network where intermediate nodes perform on-the-fly recoding, and 

```
$ make sncRecoderFly
```

for sending the codes over a butterfly network. Please see main functions under `examples/xxx.c` for details and `makefile` for other available examples.

Limitation
============
The library only supports coding against a given block of source packets, i.e., a *generation* of packets as termed in the network coding literature. Sliding-window mode is not supported.

Reference
============
[1] Ahlswede, Rudolf; N. Cai, Shuo-Yen Robert Li, and Raymond Wai-Ho Yeung. "Network Information Flow". IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, IT-46 46 (4): 1204–1216, 2000.

[2] T. Ho, M. Medard, R. Koetter, and D. R. Karger, "A Random Linear Network Coding Approach to Multicast", in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol 52, No. 10, pp. 4413–4430, 2006.

[3] Ye Li, "Efficient Network Coding for Different Network Topologies", Queen's University PhD Thesis, Oct., 2014. Available: https://qspace.library.queensu.ca/bitstream/1974/12602/1/Li_Ye_201410_PhD.pdf

[4] Ye Li, W.-Y. Chan, and S. D. Blostein, "Network Coding with Unequal Size Overlapping Generations", in Proceedings of International Symposium on Network Coding (NetCod), pp. 161-166, Cambridge, MA, June, 2012.

[5] Ye Li, S. D. Blostein, and W.-Y. Chan, "Large File Distribution Using Efficient Generation-based Network Coding", in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshop on Cloud Computing Systems, Networks, and Applications, Atlanta, GA, 2013.

[6] Ye Li, W.-Y. Chan, and S. D. Blostein, "On Efficient Decoding and Design of Sparse Random Linear Network Coding", available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.05573

[7] Ye Li, W.-Y. Chan, and S. D. Blostein, "Systematic Network Coding for Two-Hop Lossy Transmissions", EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal Processing, pp.1-14, 2015:93 DOI: 10.1186/s13634-015-0273-3
